1 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
昔者聖人之作《易》也，幽贊於神明而生蓍，	Anciently, when the sages made the Yi, in order to give mysterious assistance to the spiritual Intelligences, they produced (the rules for the use of) the divining plant. 
參天兩地而倚數，	The number 3 was assigned to heaven, 2 to earth, and from these came the (other) numbers. 
觀變於陰陽而立卦，	They contemplated the changes in the divided and undivided lines (by the process of manipulating the stalks), and formed the trigrams; 
發揮於剛柔而生爻，	from the movements that took place in the strong and weak lines, they produced (their teaching about) the separate lines. 
和順於道德而理於義，	There ensued a harmonious conformity to the course (of duty) and to virtue, with a discrimination of what was right (in each particular case). 
窮理盡性以至於命。	They (thus) made an exhaustive discrimination of what was right, and effected the complete development of (every) nature, till they arrived (in the Yi) at what was appointed for it (by Heaven).
2 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
昔者聖人之作《易》也，將以順性命之理，	Anciently, when the sages made the Yi, it was with the design that (its figures) should be in conformity with the principles underlying the natures (of men and things), and the ordinances (for them) appointed (by Heaven). 
是以立天之道曰陰與陽，	With this view they exhibited (in them) the way of heaven, calling (the lines) yin and yang; 
立地之道曰柔與剛，	the way of earth, calling (them) the weak (or soft) and the strong (or hard); 
立人之道曰仁與義。	and the way of men, under the names of benevolence and righteousness. 
兼三才而兩之，故《易》六畫而成卦。	Each (trigram) embraced (those) three Powers; and, being repeated, its full form consisted of six lines. 
分陰分陽，迭用柔剛，故《易》六位而成章。	A distinction was made of (the places assigned) to the yin and yang lines, which were variously occupied, now by the strong and now by the weak forms, and thus the figure (of each hexagram) was completed.
3 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
天地定位，	(The symbols of) heaven and earth received their determinate positions; 
山澤通氣，	(those for) mountains and collections of water interchanged their influences; 
雷風相薄，	(those for) thunder and wind excited each other the more; 
水火不相射，	and (those for) water and fire did each other no harm. 
八卦相錯。	(Then) among these eight symbols there was a mutual communication. 
數往者順，知來者逆，	The numbering of the past is a natural process.; the knowledge of the coming is anticipation. 
是故《易》逆數也。	Therefore in the Yi we have (both) anticipation (and the natural process).
4 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
雷以動之，風以散之，	Thunder serves to put things in motion; wind to scatter (the genial seeds of) them; 
雨以潤之，日以烜之，	rain to moisten them; the sun to warm them; 
艮以止之，兌以說之，	(what is symbolised by) Zhen, to arrest (and keep them in their places); (by) Dui, to give them joyful course; 
乾以君之，坤以藏之。	(by) Qian, to rule them; and by Kun, to store them up.
5 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
帝出乎震，	God comes forth in Zhen (to His producing work); 
齊乎巽，	He brings (His processes) into full and equal action in Xun; 
相見乎離，致役乎坤，	they are manifested to one another in Li; the greatest service is done for Him in Kun; 
說言乎兌，戰乎乾，	He rejoices in Dui; He struggles in Qian; 
勞乎坎，成言乎艮。	He is comforted and enters into rest in Kan; and He completes (the work of the year) in Zhen. 
萬物出乎震，震東方也。	All things are made to issue forth in Zhen, which is placed at the east. 
齊乎巽，巽東南也，	(The processes of production) are brought into full and equal action in Xun, which is placed at the south-east. 
齊也者、言萬物之絜齊也。	The being brought into full and equal action refers to the purity and equal arrangement of all things. 
離也者、明也，	Li gives the idea of brightness. 
萬物皆相見，南方之卦也。	All things are now made manifest to one another. It is the trigram of the south. 
聖人南面而聽天下，嚮明而治，蓋取諸此也。	The sages turn their faces to the south when they give audience to all under the sky, administering government towards the region of brightness:--the idea in this procedure was taken from this. 
坤也者、地也，	Kun denotes the earth, (and is placed at the south-west). 
萬物皆致養焉，故曰：致役乎坤。	All things receive from it their fullest nourishment, 
兌、正秋也，萬物之所說也，	and hence it is said, 'The greatest service is done for Him in Kun.' Dui corresponds (to the west) and to the autumn,--the season in which all things rejoice. 
故曰：說言乎兌。	Hence it is said, 'He rejoices in Dui.' 
戰乎乾，乾、西北之卦也，	He struggles in Qian, which is the trigram of the north-west. 
言陰陽相薄也。	The idea is that there the inactive and active conditions beat against each other. 
坎者、水也，	Kan denotes water. 
正北方之卦也，勞卦也，萬物之所歸也，	It is the trigram of the exact north,--the trigram of comfort and rest, what all things are tending to. 
故曰：勞乎坎。	Hence it is said, 'He is comforted and enters into rest in Kan. 
艮、東北之卦也。	Zhen is the trigram of the north-east. 
萬物之所成終而所成始也。	In it all things bring to a full end the issues of the past (year), and prepare the commencement of the next. 
故曰：成言乎艮。	Hence it is said, 'He completes (the work of the year) in Zhen.'
6 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
神也者、妙萬物而為言者也。	When we speak of Spirit we mean the subtle (presence and operation of God) with all things. 
動萬物者莫疾乎雷，	For putting all things in motion there is nothing more vehement than thunder; 
橈萬物者莫疾乎風，	for scattering them there is nothing more effective than wind; 
燥萬物者莫熯乎火，	for drying them up there is nothing more parching than fire; 
說萬物者莫說乎澤，	for giving them pleasure and satisfaction there is nothing more grateful than a lake or marsh; 
潤萬物者莫潤乎水，	for moistening them there is nothing more enriching than water; 
終萬物、始萬物者、莫盛乎艮。	for bringing them to an end and making them begin again there is nothing more fully adapted than Zhen. 
故水火相逮，	Thus water and fire contribute together to the one object; 
雷風不相悖，	thunder and wind do not act contrary to each other; 
山澤通氣，	mountains and collections of water interchange their influences. 
然後能變化，既成萬物也。	It is in this way, that they are able to change and transform, and to give completion to all things.
7 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
乾，健也；坤，順也；震，動也；	Qian is (the symbol of) strength; Kun, of docility; Zhen, of stimulus to movement; 
巽，入也；坎，陷也；離，麗也；	Xun, of penetration; Kan, of what is precipitous and perilous; Li, of what is bright and what is catching; 
艮，止也；兌，說也。	Zhen, of stoppage or arrest; and Dui, of pleasure and satisfaction.
8 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
乾為馬。	Qian (suggests the idea of) a horse; 
坤為牛。	Kun, that of an ox; 
震為龍。	Zhen, that of the dragon; 
巽為雞。	Xun, that of a fowl; 
坎為豕。	Kan, that of a pig; 
離為雉。	Li, that of a pheasant; 
艮為狗。	Zhen, that of a dog; 
兌為羊。	and Dui, that of a sheep.
9 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
乾為首。	Qian suggests the idea of the head; 
坤為腹。	Kun, that of the belly; 
震為足。	Zhen, that of the feet 
巽為股。	Xun, that of the thighs; 
坎為耳。	Kan, that of the cars; 
離為目。	Li, that of the eyes; Z
艮為手。	hen, that of the hands 
兌為口。	and Dui, that of the mouth.
10 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
乾，天也，故稱乎父。	Qian is (the symbol of) heaven, and hence has the appellation of father. 
坤，地也，故稱乎母。	Kun is (the symbol of) earth, and hence has the appellation of mother, 
震一索而得男，故謂之長男。	Zhen shows a first application (of Kun to Qian), resulting in getting (the first of) its male (or undivided lines), and hence is called 'the oldest son.' 
巽一索而得女，故謂之長女。	Xun shows a first application (of Qian to Kun), resulting in getting (the first of) its female (or divided lines), and hence is called 'the oldest daughter.' 
坎再索而得男，故謂之中男。	Kan shows a second application (of Kun to Qian), resulting in getting (the second of) its male (or undivided lines), and hence is called 'the second son.' 
離再索而得女，故謂之中女。	Li shows a second application (of Qian to Kun), resulting in getting the second of its female (or divided lines), and hence is called 'the second daughter.' 
艮三索而得男，故謂之少男。	Zhen shows a third application (of Kun to Qian), resulting in getting (the third of) its male (or undivided lines), and hence is called 'the youngest son.' 
兌三索而得女，故謂之少女。	Dui shows a third application (of Qian to Kun), resulting in getting (the third of) its female (or divided lines), and hence is called 'the youngest daughter.'
11 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
乾為天，為圜，為君，為父，為玉，為金，為寒，為冰，為大赤，	Qian suggests the idea of heaven; of a circle; of a ruler; of a father; of jade; of metal; of cold; of ice; of deep red; 
為良馬，為老馬，為瘠馬，為駁馬，為木果。	of a good horse; of an old horse; of a thin horse; of a piebald horse; and of the fruit of trees.
12 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
坤為地，為母，為布，為釜，為吝嗇，為均，	Kun suggests the idea of the earth; of a mother; of cloth; of a caldron; of parsimony; of a turning lathe; 
為子母牛，為大輿，為文，為眾，為柄，	of a young heifer; of a large waggon; of what is variegated; of a multitude; and of a handle and support. 
其於地也為黑。	Among, soils it denotes what is black.
13 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
震為雷，為龍，為玄黃，為旉，	Zhen suggests the idea of thunder; of the dragon; of (the union of) the azure and the yellow; of development; 
為大塗，為長子，為決躁，	of a great highway; of the eldest son; of decision and vehemence; 
為蒼筤竹，為萑葦。	of bright young bamboos; of sedges and rushes; 
其於馬也，為善鳴，	among horses, of the good neigher; 
為馵足，為作足，為的顙。	of one whose white hind-leg appears, of the prancer, and of one with a white star in his forehead. 
其於稼也，為反生。	Among the productions of husbandry it suggests the idea of what returns to life from its disappearance (beneath the surface), 
其究為健，為蕃鮮。	of what in the end becomes the strongest, and of what is the most luxuriant.
14 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
巽為木，為風，為長女，	Xun suggests the idea of wood; of wind; of the oldest daughter; 
為繩直，為工，為白，	of a plumb-line; of a carpenter's square; of being white; 
為長，為高，為進退，為不果，為臭。	of being long; of being lofty; of advancing and receding; of want of decision; and of strong scents. 
其於人也，為寡髮，為廣顙，為多白眼，	It suggests in the human body, the idea of deficiency of hair; of a wide forehead; of a large development of the white of the eye. 
為近利市三倍，	(Among tendencies), it suggests the close pursuit of gain, even to making three hundred per cent in the market. 
其究為躁卦。	In the end it may become the trigram of decision.
15 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
坎為水，為溝瀆，	Kan suggests the idea of water; of channels and ditches (for draining and irrigation); 
為隱伏，為矯輮，為弓輪。	of being hidden and lying concealed; of being now straight, and now crooked; of a bow, and of a wheel. 
其於人也，為加憂，為心病，	As referred to man, it suggests the idea of an increase of anxiety; of distress of mind; 
為耳痛，為血卦，為赤。	of pain in the ears - it is the trigram of the blood; it suggests the idea of what is red. 
其於馬也，為美脊，為亟心，	As referred to horses, it suggests the idea of the horse with an elegant spine; of one with a high spirit; 
為下首，為薄蹄，為曳。	of one with a drooping head; of one with a thin hoof; and of one with a shambling step. 
其於輿也，為多眚，	As referred to carriages, it suggests one that encounters many risks. 
為通，為月，為盜。	It suggests what goes right through; the moon; a thief. 
其於木也，為堅多心。	Referred to trees, it suggests that which is strong, and firm-hearted.
16 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
離為火，為日，為電，為中女，	Li suggests the emblem of fire; of the sun; of lightning; of the second daughter; 
為甲胃，為戈兵。	of buff-coat and helmet; of spear and sword. 
其於人也，為大腹。	Referred to men, it suggests the large belly. 
為乾卦，	It is the trigram of dryness. 
為鱉，為蟹，為蠃，為蚌，為龜。	It suggests the emblem of a turtle; of a crab; of a spiral univalve; of the mussel; and of the tortoise. 
其於木也，為科上槁。	Referred to trees, it suggests one which is hollow and rotten above.
17 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
艮為山，為徑路，為小石，為門闕，	Zhen suggests the emblem of a mountain; of a by-path; of a small rock; of a gateway; 
為果蓏，為閽寺，為指，	of the fruits of trees and creeping plants; of a porter or a eunuch; of the (ring) finger; 
為狗，為鼠，為黔喙之屬。	of the dog; of the rat; of birds with powerful bills; 
其於木也，為堅多節。	among trees, of those which are strong, with many joints.
18 說卦:	Shuo Gua:	
兌為澤，為少女，	Dui suggests the emblem of a low-lying collection of water; of the youngest daughter; 
為巫，為口舌，	of a sorceress; of the mouth and tongue; 
為毀折，	of the decay and putting down (of things in harvest); 
為附決。	of the removal (of fruits) hanging (from the stems or branches); 
其於地也，為剛鹵。	among soils, of what is strong and salt; 
為妾，為羊。	of a concubine; and of a sheep.