1 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
天尊地卑，乾坤定矣。	Heaven is lofty and honourable; earth is low. (Their symbols), Qian and Kun, (with their respective meanings), were determined (in accordance with this). 
卑高以陳，貴賤位矣。	Things low and high appear displayed in a similar relation. The (upper and lower trigrams, and the relative position of individual lines, as) noble and mean, had their places assigned accordingly. 
動靜有常，剛柔斷矣。	Movement and rest are the regular qualities (of their respective subjects). Hence comes the definite distinction (of the several lines) as the strong and the weak. 
方以類聚，物以群分，吉凶生矣。	(Affairs) are arranged together according to their tendencies, and things are divided according to their classes. Hence were produced (the interpretations in the Yi, concerning) what is good [or lucky] and evil [or unlucky]. 
在天成象，在地成形，變化見矣。	In the heavens there are the (different) figures there completed, and on the earth there are the (different) bodies there formed. (Corresponding to them) were the changes and transformations exhibited (in the Yi).
是故，剛柔相摩，八卦相盪。	After this fashion a strong and a weak line were manipulated together (till there were the eight trigrams), and those eight trigrams were added, each to itself and to all the others, (till the sixty-four hexagrams were formed). 
鼓之以雷霆，潤之以風雨，	We have the exciting forces of thunder and lightning; the fertilising influences of wind and rain; 
日月運行，一寒一暑，	and the revolutions of the sun and moon, which give rise to cold and warmth. 
乾道成男，坤道成女。	The attributes expressed by Qian constitute the male; those expressed by Kun constitute the female. 
乾知大始，坤作成物。	Qian (symbolises Heaven, which) directs the great beginnings of things; Kun (symbolises Earth, which) gives to them their completion. 
乾以易知，坤以簡能。	It is by the ease with which it proceeds that Qian directs (as it does), and by its unhesitating response that Kun exhibits such ability.
易則易知，簡則易從。	(He who attains to this) ease (of Heaven) will be easily understood, and (he who attains to this) freedom from laborious effort (of the Earth) will be easily followed. 
易知則有親，易從則有功。	He who is easily understood will have adherents, and he who is easily followed will achieve success. 
有親則可久，有功則可大。	He who has adherents can continue long, and he who achieves success can become great. 
可久則賢人之德，可大則賢人之業。	To be able to continue long shows the virtue of the wise and able man; to be able to become great is the heritage he will acquire. 
易簡，而天下之理得矣；	With the attainment of such ease and such freedom from laborious effort, the mastery is got of all principles under the sky. 
天下之理得，而成位乎其中矣。	With the attainment of that mastery, (the sage) makes good his position in the middle (between heaven and earth).
2 繫辭上:	2 Xi Ci I:
聖人設卦觀象，繫辭焉而明吉凶，	The sages set forth the diagrams, inspected the emblems contained in them, and appended their explanations; - in this way the good fortune and bad (indicated by them) were made clear. 
剛柔相推而生變化。	The strong and the weak (lines) displace each other, and produce the changes and transformations (in the figures).
是故，吉凶者，失得之象也。	Therefore the good fortune and evil (mentioned in the explanations) are the indications of the right and wrong (in men's conduct of affairs), 
悔吝者，懮虞之象也。	and the repentance and regret (similarly mentioned) are the indications of their sorrow and anxiety. 
變化者，進退之象也。	The changes and transformations (of the lines) are the emblems of the advance and retrogression (of the vital force in nature). 
剛柔者，晝夜之象也。	Thus what we call the strong and the weak (lines) become the emblems of day and night. 
六爻之動，三極之道也。	The movements which take place in the six places (of the hexagram) show the course of the three extremes (i. e. of the three Powers in their perfect operation). 
是故，君子所居而安者，易之序也。	Therefore what the superior man rests in, in whatever position he is placed, is the order shown in the Yi; 
所樂而玩者，爻之辭也。	and the study which gives him the greatest pleasure is that of the explanations of the several lines.
是故，君子居則觀其象，而玩其辭；	Therefore the superior man, when living quietly, contemplates the emblems and studies the explanations of them; 
動則觀其變，而玩其占。	when initiating any movement, he contemplates the changes (that are made in divining), and studies the prognostications from them. 
是以自天祐之，吉无不利。	Thus 'is help extended to him from Heaven; there will be good fortune, and advantage in every movement.'
3 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
彖者，言乎象者也。	The Tuan speak of the emblematic figures (of the complete diagrams). 
爻者，言乎變者也。	The Yao speak of the changes (taking place: in the several lines). 
吉凶者，言乎其失得也。	The expressions about good fortune or bad are used with reference to (the figures and lines, as) being right or wrong (according to the conditions of time and place); 
悔吝者，言乎其小疵也。	those about repentance or regret refer to small faults (in the satisfying those conditions); 
无咎者，善補過也。	when it is said 'there will be no error,' or 'no blame,' there is reference to (the subject) repairing an error by what is good.
是故，列貴賤者存乎位。	Therefore the distinction of (the upper and lower trigrams and of the individual lines) as noble or mean is decided by the (relative) position (of the lines); 
齊小大者，存乎卦。	the regulations of small and great are found in the diagrams, 
辯吉凶者，存乎辭。	and the discriminations of good and bad fortune appear in the (subjoined) explanations. 
懮悔吝者，存乎介。	Anxiety against (having occasion for) repentance or regret should be felt at the: boundary line (between good and evil). 
震无咎者，存乎悔。	The stirring up the thought of (securing that there shall be) no blame arises from (the feeling of) repentance. 
是故，卦有小大，辭有險易。	Thus of the diagrams some are small, and some are great; and of the explanations some are startling, and some are unexciting. 
辭也者，各指其所之。	Every one of those explanations has reference to the tendencies (indicated by the symbols).
4 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
易與天地準，故能彌綸天地之道。	The Yi was made on a principle of accordance with heaven and earth, and shows us therefore, without rent or confusion, the course (of things) in heaven and earth. 
仰以觀於天文，俯以察於地理，	(The sage), in accordance with (the Yi), looking up, contemplates the brilliant phenomena of the heavens, and, looking down, examines the definite arrangements of the earth; - 
是故知幽明之故。	thus he knows the causes of darkness (or, what is obscure) and light (or, what is bright). 
原始反終，故知死生之說。	He traces things to their beginning, and follows them to their end; - thus he knows what can be said about death and life. 
精氣為物，遊魂為變，	(He perceives how the union of) essence and breath form things, and the (disappearance or) wandering away of the soul produces the change (of their constitution); - 
是故知鬼神之情狀。	thus he knows the characteristics of the anima and animus. 
與天地相似，故不違。	There is a similarity between him and heaven and earth, and hence there is no contrariety in him to them. 
知周乎萬物，而道濟天下，故不過。	His knowledge embraces all things, and his course is (intended to be) helpful to all under the sky; - and hence he falls into no error. 
旁行而不流，樂天知命，故不懮。	He acts according to the exigency of circumstances without being carried away by their current; he rejoices in Heaven and knows its ordinations; - and hence he has no anxieties. 
安土敦乎仁，故能愛。	He rests in his own (present) position, and cherishes (the spirit of) generous benevolence; - and hence he can love (without reserve). 
範圍天地之化而不過，	(Through the Yi), he comprehends as in a mould or enclosure the transformations of heaven and earth without any error; 
曲成萬物而不遺，	by an ever-varying adaptation he completes (the nature of) all things without exception; 
通乎晝夜之道而知，	he penetrates to a knowledge of the course of day and night (and all other connected phenomena); - 
故神无方而易无體。		it is thus that his operation is spirit-like, unconditioned by place, while the changes which he produces are not restricted to any form.
繫辭上:	5 Xi Ci I:
一陰一陽之謂道，	The successive movement of the inactive and active operations constitutes what is called the course (of things). 
繼之者善也，成之者性也。	That which ensues as the result (of their movement) is goodness; that which shows it in its completeness is the natures (of men and things).
仁者見之謂之仁，知者見之謂之知。	The benevolent see it and call it benevolence. The wise see it and call it wisdom. 
百姓日用而不知，	The common people, acting daily according to it, yet have no knowledge of it. 
故君子之道鮮矣。	Thus it is that the course (of things), as seen by the superior man, is seen by few. 
顯諸仁，藏諸用，	It is manifested in the benevolence (of its operations), and (then again) it conceals and stores up its resources. 
鼓萬物而不與聖人同懮，	It gives their stimulus to all things, without having the same anxieties that possess the sage. 
盛德大業至矣哉。	Complete is its abundant virtue and the greatness of its stores! 
富有之謂大業，	Its rich possessions is what is intended by 'the greatness of its stores;' 
日新之謂盛德。	the daily renovation which it produces is what is meant by 'the abundance of its virtue.' 
生生之謂易，	Production and reproduction is what is called (the process of) change. 
成象之謂乾，	The formation of the semblances (shadowy forms of things) is what we attribute to Qian; 
效法之為坤，	the giving to them their specific forms is what we attribute to Kun. 
極數知來之謂占，	The exhaustive use of the numbers (that turn up in manipulating the stalks), and (thereby) knowing (the character of) coming events, is what we call prognosticating; 
通變之謂事，	the comprehension of the changes (indicated leads us to) what we call the business (to be done). 
陰陽不測之謂神。	That which is unfathomable in (the movement of) the inactive and active operations is (the presence of a) spiritual (power).
繫辭上:	6 Xi Ci I:
夫易，廣矣大矣，	Yes, wide is the Yi and great! 
以言乎遠，則不禦；	If we speak of it in its farthest reaching, no limit can be set to it; 
以言乎邇，則靜而正；	if we speak of it with reference to what is near at hand, (its lessons are) still and correct; 
以言乎天地之間，則備矣。	if we speak of it in connexion with all between heaven and earth, it embraces all. 
夫乾，其靜也專，	There is Qian. In its (individual) stillness it is self-absorbed; 
其動也直，是以大生焉。	when exerting its motive power it goes straight forward; and thus it is that its productive action is on a grand scale. 
夫坤，其靜也翕，	There is Kun. In its (individual) stillness, it is self-collected and capacious; 
其動也闢，是以廣生焉。	when exerting its motive power, it developes its resources, and thus its productive action is on a wide scale. 
廣大配天地，變通配四時，	In its breadth and greatness, (the Yi) corresponds to heaven and earth; in its ever-recurring changes, it corresponds to the four seasons; 
陰陽之義配日月，易簡之善配至德。	in its mention of the bright or active, and the dark or inactive operation, it corresponds to the sun and moon; and the excellence seen in the ease and ready response (of its various operations) corresponds to the perfect operations (presented to us in the phenomena of nature).
7 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
子曰：「易其至矣乎！」，	The Master said: - 'Is not the Yi a perfect book?' 
夫易，聖人所以崇德而廣業也。	It was by the Yi that the sages exalted their virtue, and enlarged their sphere of occupation. 
知崇禮卑，崇效天，卑法地。	Their wisdom was high, and their rules of conduct were solid. That loftiness was after the pattern of heaven; that solidity, after the pattern of earth. 
天地設位，而易行乎其中矣，	Heaven and earth having their positions as assigned to them, the changes (of nature) take place between them. 
成性存存，道義之門。	The nature (of man) having been completed, and being continually preserved, it is the gate of all good courses and righteousness.
8 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
聖人有以見天下之賾，	The sage was able to survey all the complex phenomena under the sky. 
而擬諸其形容，象其物宜，	He then considered in his mind how they could be figured, and (by means of the diagrams) represented their material forms and their character. 
是故謂之象。	Hence these (diagrams) are denominated Semblances (or emblematic figures, the Hsiang). 
聖人有以見天下之動，	A (later) sage was able to survey the motive influences working all under the sky. 
而觀其會通，以行其典禮。	He contemplated them in. their common action and special nature, in order to bring out the standard and proper tendency of each. 
繫辭焉，以斷其吉凶，	He then appended his explanation (to each line of the diagrams), to determine the good or evil indicated by it. 
是故謂之爻。	Hence those (lines with their explanations) are denominated Imitations (the Yao). 
言天下之至賾，而不可惡也。	(The diagrams) speak of the most complex phenomena under the sky, and yet there is nothing in them that need awaken dislike; 
言天下之至動，而不可亂也。	the explanations of the lines speak of the subtlest movements under the sky, and yet there is nothing in them to produce confusion. 
擬之而後言，	(A learner) will consider what is said (under the diagrams), and then speak; 
議之而後動，	he will deliberate on what is said (in the explanations of the lines), and then move. 
擬議以成其變化。	By such consideration and deliberations he will be able to make all the changes which he undertakes successful.
「鳴鶴在陰，	'Here hid, retired, cries out the crane;
其子和之，	Her young's responsive cry sounds there.
我有好爵，	Of spirits good I drain this cup;
吾與爾靡之。」	With thee a cup I'll freely share.'
子曰：「君子居其室，出其言，	The Master said: - 'The superior man occupies his apartment and sends forth his words. 
善則千里之外應之，況其邇者乎，	If they be good, they will be responded to at a distance of more than a thousand Li; - how much more will they be so in the nearer circle! 
居其室，出其言不善，則千里之外違之，	He occupies his apartment and sends forth his words. If they be evil, they will awaken opposition at a distance of more than a thousand Li; - 
況其邇者乎，	how much more will they do so in the nearer circle! 
言出乎身，加乎民，	Words issue from one's person, and proceed to affect the people. 
行發乎邇，見乎遠。	Actions proceed from what is near, and their effects are seen at a distance. 
言行君子之樞機，	Words and actions are the hinge and spring of the superior man. 
樞機之發，榮辱之主也。	The movement of that hinge and spring determines glory or disgrace. 
言行，君子之所以動天地也，可不慎乎。」	His words and actions move heaven and earth; - may he be careless in regard to them?'
「同人，先號咷而後笑。」	'(The representative of) the union of men first cries out and weeps, and afterwards laughs.' 
子曰：「君子之道，	The Master said, on this, -'The ways of good men (different seem).This in a public office toils;
或出或處，	That in his home the time beguiles.
或默或語，	One man his lips with silence seals; Another all his mind reveals.
二人同心，	But when two men are one in heart,
其利斷金。	Not iron bolts keep them apart;
同心之言，	The words they in their union use,
其臭如蘭。」	Fragrance like orchid plants diffuse.'
「初六，藉用白茅，无咎。」	'The first six, (divided), shows its subject placing mats of the white grass beneath what he sets on the ground.' 
子曰：「苟錯諸地而可矣。	The Master said: - 'To place the things on the ground might be considered sufficient; 
藉之用茅，何咎之有？	but when he places beneath them mats of the white grass, what occasion for blame can there be? 
慎之至也。	Such a course shows the height of carefulness. 
夫茅之為物薄，而用可重也。	The white grass is a trivial thing, but, through the use made of it, it may become important. 
慎斯術也以往，其无所失矣。」	He who goes forward using such careful art will not fall into any error.'
「勞謙君子，有終吉。」	'A superior man toiling laboriously and yet humble! He will bring things to an end, and with good fortune.' 
子曰：「勞而不伐，有功而不德，	The Master said on this: - 'He toils with success, but does not boast of it; he achieves merit, but takes no virtue to himself from it; - 
厚之至也，語以其功下人者也。	this is the height of generous goodness, and speaks of the man who with (great) merit yet places himself below others. 
德言盛，禮言恭，	He wishes his virtue to be more and more complete, and in his intercourse with others to be more and more respectful; - 
謙也者，致恭以存其位者也。」	he who is so humble, carrying his respectfulness to the utmost, will be able to preserve himself in his position.'
「亢龍有悔」，	'The dragon (is seen) beyond his proper haunts; there will be occasion for repentance.' 
子曰：「貴而无位，高而无民，	The Master said on this: - 'He is noble, but is not in his correct place; he is on high, but there are no people to acknowledge him; 
賢人在下位而无輔，	there is a man of virtue and ability below, but he will not assist him. 
是以動而有悔也。」	Hence whatever movement he may make will give occasion for repentance.'
「不出戶庭，无咎。」	'He does not quit the courtyard before his door; - there will be no occasion for blame.' 
子曰：「亂之所生也，則言語以為階。	The Master said on this: - 'When disorder arises, it will be found that (ill-advised) speech was the steppingstone to it. 
君不密，則失臣；	If a ruler do not keep secret (his deliberations with his minister), he will lose that minister. 
臣不密，則失身；	If a minister do not keep secret (his deliberations with his ruler), he will lose his life. 
幾事不密，則害成。	If (important) matters in the germ be not kept secret, that will be injurious to their accomplishment. 
是以君子慎密而不出也。」	Therefore the superior man is careful to maintain secrecy, and does not allow himself to speak.'
子曰：「作易者其知盜乎？	The Master said: - 'The makers of the Yi may be said to have known (the philosophy of) robbery. 
易曰：負且乘，致寇至。	The Yi says, "He is a burden-bearer, and yet rides in a carriage, thereby exciting robbers to attack him." 
負也者，小人之事也。	Burden-bearing is the business of a small man. 
乘也者，君子之器也。	A carriage is the vehicle of a gentleman. 
小人而乘君子之器，盜思奪之矣！	When a small man rides in the vehicle of a gentle man, robbers will think of taking it from him. 
上慢下暴，盜思伐之矣！	(When one is) insolent to those above him, and oppressive to those below, robbers will wish to attack him. 
慢藏誨盜，冶容誨淫，	Careless laying up of things excites to robbery, (as a woman's) adorning of herself excites to lust. 
易曰：「負且乘，致寇至，盜之招也。」	What the Yi says about the burden-bearer's riding in a carriage, and exciting robbers to attack him, (shows how) robbery is called out.'
繫辭上:	9 Xi Ci I:
天一地二，天三地四，天五地六，天七地八，天九地十。	To heaven belongs (the number) 1; to earth, 2; to heaven, 3; to earth, 4; to heaven, 5; to earth, 6; to heaven, 7; to earth, 8; to heaven, 9; to earth, 10. 
天數五，地數五，	The numbers belonging to heaven are five, and those belonging to earth are (also) five. 
五位相得而各有合。	The numbers of these two series correspond to each other (in their fixed positions), and each one has another that may be considered its mate. 
天數二十有五，地數三十，	The heavenly numbers amount to 25, and the earthly to 30. 
凡天地之數，五十有五，	The numbers of heaven and earth together amount to 55. 
此所以成變化，而行鬼神也。	It is by these that the changes and transformations are effected, and the spirit-like agencies kept in movement. 
大衍之數五十，其用四十有九。	The numbers of the Great Expansion, (multiplied together), make 50, of which (only) 49 are used (in divination). 
分而為二以象兩，	(The stalks representing these) are divided into two heaps to represent the two (emblematic lines, or heaven and earth). 
掛一以象三，	One is then taken (from the heap on the right), and placed (between the little finger of the left hand and the next), that there may thus be symbolised the three (powers of heaven, earth, and man). 
揲之以四以象四時，	(The heaps on both sides) are manipulated by fours to represent the four seasons; 
歸奇於扐以象閏。	and then the remainders are returned, and placed (between) the two middle fingers of the left hand, to represent the intercalary month. 
五歲再閏，故再扐而後掛。	In five years there are two intercalations, and therefore there are two operations; and afterwards the whole process is repeated.
乾之策，二百一十有六；	The numbers (required) for Qian (or the undivided line) amount to 216; 
坤之策，百四十有四，凡三百有六十，當期之日。	those for Kun (or the divided line), to 144. Together they are 360, corresponding to the days of the year. 
二篇之策，萬有一千五百二十，當萬物之數也。	The number produced by the lines in the two parts (of the Yi) amount to 11,520, corresponding to the number of all things. 
是故，四營而成易，十有八變而成卦。	Therefore by means of the four operations is the Yi completed. It takes 18 changes to form a hexagram. 
八卦而小成，	(The formation of) the eight trigrams constitutes the small completion (of the Yi). 
引而伸之，觸類而長之，天下之能事畢矣。	If we led on the diagrams and expanded them, if we prolonged each by the addition of the proper lines, then all events possible under the sky might have their representation. 
顯道神德行，	(The diagrams) make manifest (by their appended explanations), the ways (of good and ill fortune), and show virtuous actions in their spiritual relations. 
是故可與酬酢，可與祐神矣。	In this way, by consulting them, we may receive an answer (to our doubts), and we may also by means of them assist the spiritual (power in its agency in nature and providence). 
子曰：「知變化之道者，其知神之所為乎。」	The Master said: - 'He who knows the method of change and transformation may be said to know what is done by that spiritual (power).'
繫辭上:	10 Xi Ci I:
易有聖人之道四焉；	In the Yi there are four things characteristic of the way of the sages. 
以言者尚其辭，以動者尚其變，	We should set the highest value on its explanations to guide us in speaking; on its changes for (the initiation of) our movements; 
以制器者尚其象，以卜筮者尚其占。	on its emblematic figures for (definite action as in) the construction of implements; and on its prognostications for our practice of divination. 
以君子將有為也，將有行也，問焉而以言，	Therefore, when a superior man is about to take action of a more private or of a public character, he asks (the Yi), making his inquiry in words.
其受命也如響，	 It receives his order, and the answer comes as the echo's response. 
无有遠近幽深，遂知來物。	Be the subject remote or near, mysterious or deep, he forthwith knows of what kind will be the coming result. 
非天下之至精，其孰能與於此。	(If the Yi) were not the most exquisite thing under heaven, would it be concerned in such an operation as this?
參伍以變，錯綜其數，通其變，遂成天下之文。	(The stalks) are manipulated by threes and fives to determine (one) change; they are laid on opposite sides, and placed one up, one down, to make sure of their numbers; 
極其數，遂定天下之象。	and the (three necessary) changes are gone through with in this way, till they form the figures pertaining to heaven or to earth. 
非天下之至變，其孰能與於此。	Their numbers are exactly determined, and the emblems of (all things) under the sky are fixed. (If the Yi) were not the thing most capable of change of all things under heaven, how could it effect such a result as this? 
易无思也，无為也，	In (all these operations forming) the Yi, there is no thought and no action. 
寂然不動，感而遂通天下之故。	It is still and without movement; but, when acted on, it penetrates forthwith to all phenomena and events under the sky. 
非天下之至神，其孰能與於此。	If it were not the most spirit-like thing under the sky, how could it be found doing this?
夫易，聖人之所以極深而研幾也。	The (operations forming the) Yi are the method by which the sages searched out exhaustively what was deep, and investigated the minutest springs (of things). 
唯深也，故能通天下之志。	'Those operations searched out what was deep:' - therefore they could penetrate to the views of all under the sky. 
唯幾也，故能成天下之務。	'They made apparent the minutest springs of (things):' - therefore they could bring to a completion all undertakings under the sky. 
唯神也，故不疾而速，不行而至。	'Their action was spirit-like:' - therefore they could make speed without hurry, and reached their destination without travelling. 
子曰：「易有聖人之道四焉」者，此之謂也。	This is the import of what the Master said, that 'In the Yi there are four things indicating the way of the sages.'
繫辭上:	11 Xi Ci I:
子曰：「夫易，何為者也？	The Master said: - 'What is it that the Yi does? 
夫易開物成務，冒天下之道，	The Yi opens up (the knowledge of the issues of) things, accomplishes the undertakings (of men), and embraces under it (the way of) all things under the sky. 
如斯而已者也。	This and nothing more is what the Yi does. 
是故，聖人以通天下之志，	Thereby the sages, through (divination by) it, would give their proper course to the aims of all under the sky, 
以定天下之業，以斷天下之疑。」	would give stability to their undertakings, and determine their doubts.' 
是故，蓍之德，圓而神；	Therefore the virtue of the stalks is versatile and spirit-like; 
卦之德，方以知；	that of the diagrams is exact and wise; 
六爻之義，易以貢。	and the meaning given by the six lines is changeful to give (the proper information to men). 
聖人以此洗心，退藏於密，	The sages having, by their possession of these (three virtues), cleansed their minds, retired and laid them up in the secrecy (of their own consciousness). 
吉凶與民同患。	But their sympathies were with the people in regard both to their good fortune and evil. 
神以知來，知以藏往，	By their spirit-like ability they knew (the character of) coming events, and their wisdom had stored up (all experiences of) the past. 
其孰能與此哉！	Who could be able to accomplish all this? 
古之聰明叡知神武而不殺者夫？	(Only our) ancient sages, quick in apprehension and clear in discernment, of far-reaching intelligence, and all-embracing knowledge, and with a majesty, going spirit-like to its objects; - it was only they who could do so.
是以，明於天之道，而察於民之故，是興神物以前民用。	Therefore (those sages), fully understanding the way of Heaven, and having clearly ascertained the experience of the people, instituted (the employment of) these spirit-like things, as a provision for the use of the people. 
聖人以此齊戒，以神明其德夫！	The sages went about the employment of them (moreover) by purifying their hearts and with reverent caution, thereby giving (more) spirituality and intelligence to their virtue. 
是故，闔戶謂之坤；	Thus, a door shut may be pronounced (analogous to) Kun (or the inactive condition), 
闢戶謂之乾；	and the opening of the door (analogous to) Qian (or the active condition). 
一闔一闢謂之變；	The opening succeeding the being shut may be pronounced (analogous to what we call) a change; 
往來不窮謂之通；	and the passing from one of these states to the other may be called the constant course (of things). 
見乃謂之象；	The (first) appearance of anything (as a bud) is what we call a semblance; 
形乃謂之器；	when it has received its complete form, we call it a definite thing. 
制而用之，謂之法；	(The divining-plant having been produced, the sages) set it apart and laid down the method of its employment, - what we call the laws (of divination). 
利用出入，民咸用之，謂之神。	The advantage arising from it in external and internal matters, so that the people all use it, stamps it with a character which we call spirit-like.
是故，易有太極，是生兩儀，	Therefore in (the system of) the Yi there is the Grand Terminus, which produced the two elementary Forms. 
兩儀生四象，四象生八卦，	Those two Forms produced the Four emblematic Symbols, which again produced the eight Trigrams. 
八卦定吉凶，吉凶生大業。	The eight trigrams served to determine the good and evil (issues of events), and from this determination was produced the (successful prosecution of the) great business (of life). 
是故，法象莫大乎天地，	Therefore of all things that furnish models and visible figures there are none greater than heaven and earth; 
變通莫大乎四時，	of things that change and extend an influence (on others) there are none greater than the four seasons; 
縣象著明莫大乎日月，	of things suspended (in the sky) with their figures displayed clear and bright, there are none greater than the sun and moon; 
崇高莫大乎富貴；	of the honoured and exalted there are none greater than he who is the rich and noble (one); 
備物致用，立成器以為天下利，莫大乎聖人；	in preparing things for practical use, and inventing and making instruments for the benefit of all under the sky, there are none greater than the sages; 
探賾索隱，鉤深致遠，	to explore what is complex, search out what is hidden, to hook up what lies deep, and reach to what is distant, 
以定天下之吉凶，成天下之亹亹者，莫大乎蓍龜。	thereby determining (the issues) for good or ill of all events under the sky, and making all men under heaven full of strenuous endeavours, there are no (agencies) greater than those of the stalks and the tortoise-shell.
是故，天生神物，聖人則之；	Therefore Heaven produced the spirit-like things, and the sages took advantage of them. 
天地變化，聖人效之；	(The operations of) heaven and earth are marked by (so many) changes and transformations; and the sages imitated them (by means of the Yi). 
天垂象，見吉凶，聖人象之。	Heaven hangs out its (brilliant) figures from which are seen good fortune and bad, and the sages made their emblematic interpretations accordingly. 
河出圖，洛出書，聖人則之。	The He gave forth the map, and the Lo the writing, of (both of) which the sages took advantage. 
易有四象，所以示也。	In the (scheme of the) Yi there are the four symbolic figures by which they inform men (in divining of the lines making up the diagrams); 
繫辭焉，所以告也。	the explanations appended to them convey the significance (of the diagrams and lines); 
定之以吉凶，所以斷也。	and the determination (of the divination) as fortunate or the reverse, to settle the doubts (of men).
12 繫辭上:	Xi Ci I:
易曰：「自天祐之，吉无不利。」	It is said in the Yi, 'Help is given to him from Heaven. There will be good fortune; advantage in every respect.' 
子曰：「祐者，助也。	The Master said: - 'You is the symbol of assisting. 
天之所助者，順也；	He whom Heaven assists is observant (of what is right); 
人之所助者，信也。	he whom men assist is sincere. 
履信思乎順，又以尚賢也。	The individual here indicated treads the path of sincerity and desires to be observant (of what is right), and studies to exalt the worthy. 
是以自天祐之，吉无不利也。」	Hence "Help is given to him from Heaven. There will be good fortune, advantage in every respect."'
子曰：「書不盡言，言不盡意。	The Master said: - 'The written characters are not the full exponent of speech, and speech is not the full expression of ideas; - 
然則聖人之意，其不可見乎。」	is it impossible then to discover the ideas of the sages?' 
子曰：「聖人立象以盡意，	The Master said: - 'The sages made their emblematic symbols to set forth fully their ideas; 
設卦以盡情偽，	appointed (all) the diagrams to show fully the truth and falsehood (of things); 
繫辭以盡其言，	appended their explanations to give the full expression of their words; 
變而通之以盡利，	and changed (the various lines) and made general the method of doing so, to exhibit fully what was advantageous. 
鼓之舞之以盡神。」	They (thus) stimulated (the people) as by drums and dances, thereby completely developing the spirit-like (character of the Yi).'
乾坤其易之縕邪？	May we not say that Qian and Kun [= the yang and yin, or the undivided and divided lines] are the secret and substance of the Yi? 
乾坤成列，而易立乎其中矣。	Qian and Kun being established in their several places, the system of changes was thereby constituted. 
乾坤毀，則无以見易，	If Qian and Kun were taken away, there would be no means of seeing that system; 
易不可見，則乾坤或幾乎息矣。	and if that system were not seen, Qian and Kun would almost cease to act. 
是故，形而上者謂之道，形而下者謂之器。	Hence that which is antecedent to the material form exists, we say, as an ideal method, and that which is subsequent to the material form exists, we say, as a definite thing. 
化而裁之謂之變，	Transformation and shaping is what we call change; 
推而行之謂之通，	carrying this out and operating with it is what we call generalising the method; 
舉而錯之天下之民，謂之事業。	taking the result and setting it forth for all the people under heaven is, we say, (securing the success of) the business of life.
是故，夫象，聖人有以見天下之賾，	Hence, to speak of the emblematic figures: - (The sage) was able to survey all the complex phenomena under the sky. 
而擬諸其形容，象其物宜，	He then considered in his mind how they could be figured, and (by means of the diagrams) represented their material forms and their character. 
是故謂之象。	Hence those (diagrams) are denominated Semblances. 
聖人有以見天下之動，	A (later) sage was able to survey the motive influences working all under the sky. 
而觀其會通，以行其典禮，繫辭焉，	He contemplated them in their common action and special nature, in order to bring out the standard and proper tendency of each. 
以斷其吉凶，	He then appended his explanation (to each line), to determine the good or evil indicated by it. 
是故謂之爻。	Hence those (lines with their explanations) are denominated Imitations (the Yao). 
極天下之賾者，存乎卦；	The most thorough mastery of all the complex phenomena under the sky is obtained from the diagrams. 
鼓天下之動者，存乎辭；	The greatest stimulus to movement in adaptation to all affairs under the sky is obtained from the explanations. 
化而裁之，存乎變；	The transformations and shaping that take place are obtained from the changes (of the lines); 
推而行之，存乎通；	the carrying this out and operating with it is obtained from the general method (that has been established). 
神而明之，存乎其人；	The seeing their spirit-like intimations and understanding them depended on their being the proper men; 
默而成之，不言而信，存乎德行。	and the completing (the study of) them by silent meditation, and securing the faith of others without the use of words, depended on their virtuous conduct.
1 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
八卦成列，象在其中矣。	The eight trigrams having been completed in their proper order, there were in each the (three) emblematic lines. 
因而重之，爻在其中矣。	They were then multiplied by a process of addition till the (six) component lines appeared. 
剛柔相推，變在其中矣。	The strong line and the weak push themselves each into the place of the other, and hence the changes (of the diagrams) take place. 
繫辭焉而命之，動在其中矣。	The appended explanations attach to every form of them its character (of good or ill), and hence the movements (suggested by divination) are determined accordingly.
吉凶悔吝者，生乎動者也。	Good fortune and ill, occasion for repentance or regret, all arise from these movements. 
剛柔者，立本者也。	The strong and the weak (lines) have their fixed and proper places (in the diagrams); 
變通者，趣時者也。	their changes, however varied, are according to the requirements of the time (when they take place).
吉凶者，貞勝者也。	Good fortune and ill are continually prevailing each against the other by an exact rule. 
天地之道，貞觀者也。	By the same rule, heaven and earth, in their course, continually give forth (their lessons); 
日月之道，貞明者也，	the sun and moon continually emit their light; 
天下之動，貞夫一者也。	all the movements under the sky are constantly subject to this one and the same rule.
夫乾，確然示人易矣。	Qian, (the symbol of heaven, and) conveying the idea of strength, shows to men its easy (and natural) action. 
夫坤，隤然示人簡矣。	Kun, (the symbol of earth, and) conveying the idea of docility, shows to men its compendious (receptivity and operation). 
爻也者，效此者也。	The Yao (or lines) are imitative representations of this. 
象也者，像此者也。	The Xiang, or emblematic figures, are pictorial representations of the same.
爻象動乎內，吉凶見乎外，	The movements of the lines and figures take place (at the hand of the operator), and are unseen; the good fortune or ill is seen openly and is beyond. 
功業見乎變，聖人之情見乎辭。	The work to be done appears by the changes; the sympathies of the sages are seen in their explanations.
天地之大德曰生，	The great attribute of heaven and earth is the giving and maintaining life.
聖人之大寶曰位。	 What is most precious for the sage is to get the (highest) place - (in which he can be the human representative of heaven and earth). 
何以守位曰仁，何以聚人曰財。	What will guard this position for him? Men. How shall he collect a large population round him? 
理財正辭，禁民為非曰義。	By the power of his wealth. The right administration of that wealth, correct instructions to the people, and prohibitions against wrong-doing; - these constitute his righteousness.
2 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
古者包犧氏之王天下也，	Anciently, when Bao-xi had come to the rule of all under heaven, 
仰則觀象於天，俯則觀法於地，	looking up, he contemplated the brilliant forms exhibited in the sky, and looking down he surveyed the patterns shown on the earth. 
觀鳥獸之文，與地之宜，	He contemplated the ornamental appearances of birds and beasts and the (different) suitabilities of the soil. 
近取諸身，遠取諸物，	Near at hand, in his own person, he found things for consideration, and the same at a distance, in things in general. 
於是始作八卦，以通神明之德，以類萬物之情。	On this he devised the eight trigrams, to show fully the attributes of the spirit-like and intelligent (operations working secretly), and to classify the qualities of the myriads of things.
作結繩而為罔罟，以佃以漁，	He invented the making of nets of various kinds by knitting strings, both for hunting and fishing. 
蓋取諸離。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Lu (the third trigram, and thirtieth hexagram).
包犧氏沒，神農氏作，	On the death of Bao-xi, there arose Shen-nong (in his place). 
斲木為耜，揉木為耒，	He fashioned wood to form the share, and bent wood to make the plough-handle. 
耒耨之利，以教天下，蓋取諸益。	The advantages of ploughing and weeding were then taught to all under heaven. The idea of this was taken, probably, from Yi (the forty-second hexagram).
日中為市，致天下之民，聚天下之貨，	He caused markets to be held at midday, thus bringing together all the people, and assembling in one place all their wares. 
交易而退，各得其所，	They made their exchanges and retired, every one having got what he wanted. 
蓋取諸噬嗑。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Shi He (the twenty-first hexagram).
神農氏沒，黃帝、堯、舜氏作，	After the death of Shen-nong, there arose Huang Di, Yao, and Shun. 
通其變，使民不倦，	They carried through the (necessarily occurring) changes, so that the people did (what was required of them) without being wearied; 
神而化之，使民宜之。	yea, they exerted such a spirit-like transformation, that the people felt constrained to approve their (ordinances) as right. 
易窮則變，	When a series of changes has run all its course, another change ensues. 
變則通，通則久。	When it obtains free course, it will continue long. 
是以自天祐之，吉无不利，	Hence it was that 'these (sovereigns) were helped by Heaven; they had good fortune, and their every movement was advantageous.' 
黃帝、堯、舜垂衣裳而天下治，	Huang Di, Yao, and Shun (simply) wore their upper and lower garments (as patterns to the people), and good order was secured all under heaven. 
蓋取諸乾坤。	The idea of all this was taken, probably, from Qian and Kun (the first and eighth trigrams, or the first and second hexagrams).
刳木為舟，剡木為楫，	They hollowed out trees to form canoes; they cut others long and thin to make oars. 
舟楫之利，以濟不通，	Thus arose the benefit of canoes and oars for the help of those who had no means of intercourse with others. 
致遠以利天下，	They could now reach the most distant parts, and all under heaven were benefited. 
蓋取諸渙。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Huan (the fifty-ninth hexagram).
服牛乘馬，引重致遠，以利天下，	They used oxen (in carts) and yoked horses (to chariots), thus providing for the carriage of what was heavy, and for distant journeys - thereby benefiting all under the sky. 
蓋取諸隨。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Sui (the seventeenth hexagram).
重門擊柝，以待暴客，	They made the (defence of the) double gates, and (the warning of) the clapper, as a preparation against the approach of marauding visitors. 
蓋取諸豫。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Yu (the sixteenth hexagram).
斷木為杵，掘地為臼，	They cut wood and fashioned it into pestles; they dug in the ground and formed mortar's. 
臼杵之利，萬民以濟，	Thus the myriads of the people received the benefit arising from the use of the pestle and mortar. 
蓋取諸小過。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Xiao Guo (the sixty-second hexagram).
弦木為弧，剡木為矢，	They bent wood by means of string so as to form bows, and sharpened wood so as to make arrows. 
弧矢之利，以威天下，	This gave the benefit of bows and arrows, and served to produce everywhere a feeling of awe. 
蓋取諸睽。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Kui (the thirty-eighth hexagram).
上古穴居而野處，	In the highest antiquity they made their homes (in winter) in caves, and (in summer) dwelt in the open country. 
後世聖人易之以宮室，上棟下宇，以待風雨，	In subsequent ages, for these the sages substituted houses, with the ridge-beam above and the projecting roof below, as a provision against wind and rain. 
蓋取諸大壯。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Da Zhuang (the thirty-fourth hexagram).
古之葬者，厚衣之以薪，葬之中野，	When the ancients buried their dead, they covered the body thickly with pieces of wood, having laid it in the open country. 
不封不樹，喪期无數。	They raised no mound over it, nor planted trees around; nor had they any fixed period for mourning. 
後世聖人易之以棺槨，	In subsequent ages the sages substituted for these practices the inner and outer coffins. 
蓋取諸大過。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Da Guo (the twenty-eighth hexagram).
上古結繩而治，	In the highest antiquity, government was carried on successfully by the use of knotted cords (to preserve the memory of things). 
後世聖人易之以書契，	In subsequent ages the sages substituted for these written characters and bonds. 
百官以治，萬民以察，	By means of these (the doings of) all the officers could be regulated, and (the affairs of) all the people accurately examined. 
蓋取諸夬。	The idea of this was taken, probably, from Guai (the forty-third hexagram).
繫辭下:	3 Xi Ci II:
是故，易者，象也，	Therefore what we call the Yi is (a collection of) emblematic lines. 
象也者像也。	They are styled emblematic as being resemblances. 
彖者，材也，	What we call the Tuan (or king Wen's explanations) are based on the significance (of each hexagram as a whole). 
爻也者，效天下之動者也。	We call the lines (of the figures) Yao from their being according to the movements taking place all under the sky. 
是故，吉凶生，而悔吝著也。	In this way (we see) the rise of good fortune and evil, and the manifestation of repentance and regret.
4 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
陽卦多陰，陰卦多陽，	In the Yang trigrams (or those of the undivided line) there are more of the Yin lines, and in the Yin trigrams (or those of the divided line) there are more of the Yang lines. 
其故何也？	What is the cause of this? 
陽卦奇，陰卦偶。	It is because the Yang lines are odd (or made by one stroke), and the Yin lines are even (or. made by two strokes). 
其德行何也？	What (method of) virtuous conduct is thus intimated? 
陽一君而二民，君子之道也。	In the Yang trigrams we have one ruler, and two subjects, - suggesting the way of the superior man. 
陰二君而一民，小人之道也。	In the Yin trigrams we have two rulers, and one subject, - suggesting the way of the small man.
5 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易曰：「憧憧往來，朋從爾思。」	It is said in the Yi, 'Full of anxious thoughts you go and come; (only) friends will follow you and think with you.' 
子曰：「天下何思何慮？	The Master said: - 'In all (the processes taking place) under heaven, what is there of thinking? what is there of anxious scheming? 
天下同歸而殊塗，一致而百慮，	They all come to the same (successful) issue, though by different paths; there is one result, though there might be a hundred anxious schemes. 
天下何思何慮？」	What is there of thinking? what is there of anxious scheming?'
「日往則月來，月往則日來，日月相推而明生焉。	The sun goes and the moon comes; the moon goes and the sun comes; - the sun and moon thus take the place each of the other, and their shining is the result. 
寒往則暑來，暑往則寒來，寒暑相推而歲成焉。	The cold goes and the heat comes; the heat goes and the cold comes; - it is by this mutual succession of the cold and heat that the year is completed. 
往者屈也，來者信也，屈信相感而利生焉。」	That which goes becomes less and less, and that which comes waxes more and more; - it is by the influence on each other of this contraction and expansion that the advantages (of the different conditions) are produced.
「尺蠖之屈，以求信也。	When the looper coils itself up, it thereby straightens itself again; 
龍蛇之蟄，以存身也。	when worms and snakes go into the state of hybernation, they thereby keep themselves alive. 
精義入神，以致用也。	(So), when we minutely investigate the nature and reasons (of things), till we have entered into the inscrutable and spirit-like in them, we attain to the largest practical application of them; 
利用安身，以崇德也。	when that application becomes the quickest and readiest, and all personal restfulness is secured, our virtue is thereby exalted. 
過此以往，未之或知也。	Going on beyond this, we reach a point which it is hardly possible to know. 
窮神知化，德之盛也。」	We have thoroughly comprehended the inscrutable and spirit-like, and know the processes of transformation; - this is the fulness of virtue.
易曰：「困于石，據于蒺蔾，	It is said in the Yi, '(The third line shows its subject) distressed before a rock, and trying to lay hold of thorns; 
入于其宮，不見其妻，凶。」	entering into his palace and not seeing his wife: - there will be evil.' 
子曰：「非所困而困焉，名必辱。	The Master said: - 'If one be distressed by what need not distress him, his name is sure to be disgraced; 
非所據而據焉，身必危。	if he lay hold on what he should not touch, his life is sure to be imperilled. 
既辱且危，死期將至，妻其可得見耶？」	In disgrace and danger, his death will (soon) come; - is it possible for him in such circumstances to see his wife?'
易曰：「公用射隼，于高墉之上，獲之无不利。」	It is said in the Yi, 'The duke with (his bow) shoots at the falcon on the top of the high wall; he hits it: - his every movement will be advantageous.' 
子曰：「隼者禽也，弓矢者器也，射之者人也。	The Master said: - 'The falcon is a bird (of prey); the bow and arrow is a weapon (of war); the shooter is a man. 
君子藏器於身，待時而動，何不利之有？	The superior man keeps his weapon concealed about his person, and waits for the proper time to move; - doing this, how should his movement be other than successful? 
動而不括，是以出而有獲，	There is nothing to fetter or embarrass his movement; and hence, when he comes forth, he succeeds in his object. 
語成器而動者也。」	The language speaks of movement when the instrument necessary to it is ready and perfect.'
子曰：「小人不恥不仁，不畏不義，	The Master said: - 'The small man is not ashamed of what is not benevolent, nor does he fear to do what is not righteous. 
不見利不勸，不威不懲，	Without the prospect of gain he does not stimulate himself to what is good, nor does he correct himself without being moved. 
小懲而大誡，此小人之福也。	Self-correction, however, in what is small will make him careful in what would be of greater consequence; - and this is the happiness of the small man. 
易曰：『履校滅趾无咎，此之謂也』。」	It is said in the Yi, "His feet are in the stocks, and he is disabled in his toes: - there will be no (further) occasion for blame."'
「善不積，不足以成名；	If acts of goodness be not accumulated, they are not sufficient to give its finish to one's name; 
惡不積，不足以滅身。	if acts of evil be not accumulated, they are not sufficient to destroy one's life. 
小人以小善為无益，而弗為也，	The small man thinks that small acts of goodness are of no benefit, and does not do them; 
以小惡為无傷，而弗去也，	and that small deeds of evil do no harm, and does not abstain from them. 
故惡積而不可掩，罪大而不可解。	Hence his wickedness becomes great till it cannot be covered, and his guilt becomes great till it cannot be pardoned. 
易曰：『何校滅耳凶』。」	This is what the Yi says, 'He wears the cangue and his ears are destroyed: - there will be evil.'
子曰：「危者，安其位者也；	The Master said: - 'He who keeps danger in mind is he who will rest safe in his seat; 
亡者，保其存者也；	he who keeps ruin in mind is he who will preserve his interests secure; 
亂者，有其治者也。	he who sets the danger of disorder before him is he who will maintain the state of order. 
是故，君子安而不忘危，	Therefore the superior man, when resting in safety, does not forget that danger may come; 
存而不忘亡，治而不忘亂；	when in a state of security, he does not forget the possibility of ruin; and when all is in a state of order, he does not forget that disorder may come. 
是以身安而國家可保也。	Thus his person is kept safe, and his states and all their clans can be preserved. 
易曰：『其亡其亡，繫于苞桑』。」	This is according to what the Yi says, "(Let him say), 'Shall I perish? shall I perish?' (so shall this state be firm, as if) bound to a clump of bushy mulberry trees."'
子曰：「德薄而位尊，知小而謀大，	The Master said: - 'Virtue small and office high; wisdom small and plans great; strength small and burden heavy: - 
力小而任重，鮮不及矣，	where such conditions exist, it is seldom that they do not end (in evil). 
易曰：『鼎折足，覆公餗，其形渥，凶。』言不勝其任也。」	As is said in the Yi, "The tripod's feet are overthrown, and the ruler's food is overturned. The body of him (who is thus indicated) is wet (with shame):there will be evil."'
子曰：「知幾其神乎？	The Master said: - 'Does not he who knows the springs of things possess spirit-like wisdom? 
君子上交不諂，下交不瀆，其知幾乎，	The superior man, in his intercourse with the high, uses no flattery, and, in his intercourse with the low, no coarse freedom: - does not this show that he knows the springs of things? 
幾者動之微，吉之先見者也，	Those springs are the slight beginnings of movement, and the earliest indications of good fortune (or ill). 
君子見幾而作，不俟終日。	The superior man sees them, and acts accordingly without waiting for (the delay of) a single day. 
易曰：『介于石，不終日，貞吉。』	As is said in the Yi, "He is firm as a rock, (and acts) without the delay of a single day. With firm goodness there will be good fortune." 
介如石焉，寧用終日，斷可識矣，	Firm as a rock, how should he have to wait a single day to ensure his knowing (those springs and his course)? 
君子知微知彰，知柔知剛，萬夫之望。」	The superior man knows the minute and the manifested; he knows what is weak, and what is strong: - he is a model to ten thousand.'
子曰：「顏氏之子，其殆庶幾乎？	The Master said: - 'I may venture to say that the son of the Yan family had nearly attained (the standard of perfection). 
有不善未嘗不知，知之未嘗復行也。	If anything that he did was not good, he was sure to become conscious of that; and when he knew it, he did not do the thing again. 
易曰：『不遠復，无祇悔，元吉。』」	As is said in the Yi, "(The first line shows its subject) returning from an error that has not led him far away. There is no occasion for repentance. There will be great good."'
天地絪縕，萬物化醇，	There is an intermingling of the genial influences of heaven and earth, and transformation in its various forms abundantly proceeds. 
男女構精，萬物化生，	There is an intercommunication of seed between male and female, and transformation in its living types proceeds. 
易曰：『三人行，則損一人；一人行，則得其友。』言致一也。	What is said in the Yi, 'Three individuals are walking together and one is made to disappear; there is (but) one man walking, and he gets his mate,' tells us of the effort (in nature) at oneness (of operation).
子曰：「君子安其身而後動，	The Master said: - 'The superior man (in a high place) composes himself before he (tries to) move others; 
易其心而後語，	makes his mind restful and easy before he speaks; 
定其交而後求，	settles (the principles of) his intercourse with others before he seeks anything from them. 
君子脩此三者，故全也，	The superior man cultivates these three things, and so is complete. 
危以動，則民不與也，	If he try to move others while he is himself in unrest, the people will not (act) with him; 
懼以語，則民不應也，	if he speak while he is himself in a state of apprehension, the people will not respond to him; 
无交而求，則民不與也，	if without (certain principles of) intercommunication, he issue his requests, the people will not grant them. 
莫之與，則傷之者至矣。	When there are none to accord with him, those who (work to) injure him will make their appearance. 
易曰：『莫益之，或擊之，	As is said in the Yi, "(We see one) to whose advantage none will contribute, while some will seek to assail him. 
立心勿恆，凶。』。」	He observes no regular rule in the ordering of his heart: - there will be evil."'
6 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
子曰：「乾坤其易之門邪？	The Master said: - '(The trigrams) Qian and Kun may be regarded as the gate of the Yi.' 
乾，陽物也；	Qian represents what is of the yang nature (bright and active); 
坤，陰物也；	Kun what is of the yin nature (shaded and inactive). 
陰陽合德，而剛柔有體，	These two unite according to their qualities, and there comes the embodiment of the result by the strong and weak (lines). 
以體天地之撰，以通神明之德，	In this way we have the phenomena of heaven and earth visibly exhibited, and can comprehend the operation of the spiritual intelligence. 
其稱名也雜而不越，於稽其類，	The appellations and names (of the diagrams and lines) are various, but do not go beyond (what is to be ascribed to the operation of these two conditions). 
其衰世之意邪？」	When we examine the nature and style (of the appended explanations), they seem to express the ideas of a decaying age. 
夫易，彰往而察來，	The Yi exhibits the past, and (teaches us to) discriminate (the issues of) the future; 
而微顯闡幽，	it makes manifest what is minute, and brings to light what is obscure. 
開而當名，辨物正言，斷辭則備矣，	(Then king Wen) opened (its symbols), and distinguished things in accordance with its names, so that all his words were correct and his explanations decisive; - (the book) was now complete. 
其稱名也小，其取類也大，	The appellations and names (of the diagrams and lines) are but small matters, but the classes of things comprehended under them are large. 
其旨遠，其辭文，	Their scope reaches far, and the explanations attached to them are elegant. 
其言曲而中，其事肆而隱，	The words are indirect, but to the point; the matters seem plainly set forth, but there is a secret principle in them. 
因貳以濟民行，以明失得之報。	Their object is, in cases that are doubtful, to help the people in their conduct, and to make plain the recompenses of good and evil.
7 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易之興也，其於中古乎，	Was it not in the middle period of antiquity that the Yi began to flourish? 
作易者，其有憂患乎。	Was not he who made it familiar with anxiety and calamity?
是故，履，德之基也；	Therefore (the 10th diagram), Lu, shows us the foundation of virtue; (the 15th), 
謙，德之柄也；	Xian, its handle; (the 24th), 
復，德之本也；	Fu, its root; (the 32nd), 
恆，德之固也；	Heng, its solidity; (the 41st), 
損，德之脩也；	Sun, its cultivation; (the 42nd), 
益，德之裕也；	Yi, its abundance; (the 47th), 
困，德之辨也；	Kun, its exercise of discrimination; (the 48th), 
井，德之地也；	Jing, its field and (the 57th), 
巽，德之制也。	Xun, its regulation.
履，和而至；	In Lu we have the perfection of harmony; i
謙，尊而光；	n Xian, we have the giving honour to others, and the distinction thence arising; 
復，小而辨於物；	in Fu we have what is small (at first), but there is in it a (nice) discrimination of (the qualities of) things; 
恆，雜而不厭；	in Ming we have a mixed experience, but without any weariness; 
損，先難而後易；	in Sun we have difficulty in the beginning and ease in the end; 
益，長裕而不設；	in Yi we have abundance of growth without any contrivance; 
困，窮而通；	in Kun we have the pressure of extreme difficulty, ending in a free course,; 
井，居其所而遷，	in Jing we have abiding in one's place and at the same time removal (to meet the movement of others); 
巽，稱而隱。	and in Xun we have the weighing of things (and action accordingly), but secretly and unobserved.
履以和行，謙以制禮，	(The use of) Lu appears in the harmony of the conduct; of Xian, in the regulation of ceremonies; 
復以自知，恆以一德，	of Fu, in self-knowledge; of Heng, in uniformity of virtue; 
損以遠害，益以興利，	of Sun, in keeping what is harmful at a distance; of Yi, in the promotion of what is advantageous; 
困以寡怨，井以辯義，	of Kun, in the diminution of resentments; of Jing, in the discrimination of what is righteous; 
巽以行權。	and of Xun, in the doing of what is appropriate to time and to circumstances.
8 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易之為書也不可遠，為道也屢遷，	The Yi is a book which should not be let slip from the mind. Its method (of teaching) is marked by the frequent changing (of its lines). 
變動不居，周流六虛，	They change and move without staying (in one place), flowing about into any one of the six places of the hexagram. 
上下无常，剛柔相易，不可為典要，唯變所適，	They ascend and descend, ever inconstant. The strong and the weak lines change places, so that an invariable and compendious rule cannot be derived from them; - it must vary as their changes indicate. 
其出入以度，	The goings forth and comings in (of the lines) are according to rule and measure. 
外內使知懼，	(People) learn from them in external and internal affairs to stand in awe. 
又明於憂患與故，	(The book), moreover, makes plain the nature of anxieties and calamities, and the causes of them. 
无有師保，如臨父母，	Though (its students) have neither master nor guardian, it is as if their parents drew near to them. 
初率其辭，而揆其方，	Beginning with taking note of its explanations, we reason out the principles to which they point. 
既有典常，	We thus find out that it does supply a constant and standard rule. 
苟非其人，道不虛行。	But if there be not the Proper men (to carry this out), the course cannot be pursued without them.
9 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易之為書也，原始要終，以為質也，	The Yi is a book in which the form (of each diagram) is determined by the lines from the first to the last, which must be carefully observed.
六爻相雜，唯其時物也，	The six lines are mixed together, according to the time (when they enter the figure) and their substance (as whole and divided).
其初難知，其上易知，本末也，	There is difficulty in knowing (the significance of) the first line, while to know that of the topmost line is easy; - they form the beginning and the end (of the diagram).
初辭擬之，卒成之終，	The explanation of the first line tasks the calculating (of the makers), but in the end they had (but) to complete this.
若夫雜物撰德，辨是與非，則非其中爻不備。	As to the variously-disposed intermediate lines with their diverse formations, for determining their qualities, and discriminating the right and wrong in them, we should be unprovided but for the explanations of them.
噫，亦要存亡吉凶，則居可知矣，	Yea, moreover, if we wish to know what is likely to be preserved and what to perish, what will be lucky and what will be unlucky, this may easily be known (from the explanations of the different lines).
知者觀其彖辭，則思過半矣。	But if the wise will look at the explanations of the entire diagrams, their thoughts will embrace more than half of this knowledge.
二與四同功，而異位，其善不同，二多譽，四多懼，近也，	The second and fourth lines are of the same quality (as being in even places), but their positions (with respect to the fifth line) are different, and their value is not the same; but the second is the object of much commendation, and the fourth the subject of many apprehensions, - from its nearness (to that line).
柔之為道，不利遠者，其要无咎，	But for a line in a place of weakness it is not good to be far (from the occupant of the place of strength), and what its subject should desire in such a case is (merely) to be without blame.
其用柔中也，	The advantage (here) is in (the second line) being in the central place.
三與五同功，而異位，	The third and fifth lines are of the same quality, (as being in odd places), but their positions are different; 
三多凶，五多功，貴賤之等也，	and the (occupant of) the third meets with many misfortunes, while the occupant of the fifth achieves much merit: - this arises from one being in the noble position and the other in the mean.
其柔危，其剛勝邪？	Are they occupied by the symbol of weakness? There will be peril. By that of strength? There will be victory.
10 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易之為書也，廣大悉備，	The Yi is a book of wide comprehension and great scope, embracing everything.
有天道焉，有人道焉，有地道焉。	There are in it the way of heaven, the way of man, and the way of earth.
兼三材而兩之，故六六者，	It then takes (the lines representing) those three Powers, and doubles them till they amount to six.
非它也，三材之道也，	What these six lines show is simply this, - the way of the three Powers.
道有變動，故曰爻，	This way is marked by changes and movements, and hence we have the imitative lines.
爻有等，故曰物，	Those lines are of different grades (in the trigrams), and hence we designate them from their component elements.
物相雜，故曰文，	These are mixed together, and elegant forms arise.
文不當，故吉凶生焉。	When such forms are not in their appropriate places, the ideas of good fortune and bad are thus produced.
11 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
易之興也，其當殷之末世，周之盛德邪，當文王與紂之事邪，	Was it not in the last age of Yin, when the virtue of Gou had reached its highest point, and during the troubles between king Wen and (the tyrant) Gou, that the (study of the Yi) began to flourish? 
是故其辭危，危者使平，易者使傾，	On this account the explanations (in the book) express (a feeling of) anxious apprehension, (and teach) how peril may be turned into security, and easy carelessness is sure to meet with overthrow.
其道甚大，百物不廢，	The method in which these things come about is very comprehensive, and must be acknowledged in every sphere of things.
懼以終始，其要无咎，	If at the beginning there be a cautious apprehension as to the end, there will probably be no error or cause for blame.
此之謂易之道也。	This is what is called the way of the Yi.
12 繫辭下:	Xi Ci II:
夫乾，天下之至健也，	(The hexagram) Qian represents the strongest of all under the sky.
德行恆易以知險，	Through this quality its operations are always manifested with ease, for it knows where there would be peril and embarrassment. 
夫坤，天下之至順也，	(The hexagram) Kun represents the most docile of all under the sky.
德行恆簡以知阻。	Through this quality its operations are always manifested with the promptest decision, for it knows where there would be obstruction.
能說諸心，能研諸侯之慮，	(The sages, who are thus represented, and who made the Yi,) were able to rejoice in heart (in the absolute truth of things), and were able (also) to weigh carefully all matters that could occasion anxiety; 
定天下之吉凶，成天下之亹亹者，	(thus) they fixed the good and bad fortune (of all things) under the sky, and could accomplish the things requiring strenuous efforts.
是故，變化云為，吉事有祥，	Therefore amid the changes and transformations (taking place in heaven and earth), and the words and deeds of men, events that are to be fortunate have their happy omens. 
象事知器，占事知來。	(The sages) knew the definite principles underlying the prognostications of the former class, and the future of those of the latter, (now to be) ascertained by divination.
天地設位，聖人成能。	The places of heaven and earth (in the diagrams) having been determined, the sages were able (by means of the Yi) to carry out and complete their ability. 
人謀鬼謀，百姓與能。	(In this way even) the common people were able to share with them in (deciding about) the counsels of men and the counsels of spiritual beings.
八卦以象告，	The eight trigrams communicate their information by their emblematic figures.
爻彖以情言，	The explanations appended to the lines and the completed figures tell how the contemplation of them affected (the makers).
剛柔雜居，而吉凶可見矣。	The strong and the weak lines appear mixed in them, and (thus) the good and the evil (which they indicate) can be seen.
變動以利言，	The changes and movements (which take place in the manipulation of the stalks and the formation of the diagrams) speak as from the standpoint of what is advantageous.
吉凶以情遷。	The (intimations of) good and evil vary according to the place and nature (of the lines).
是故愛惡相攻而吉凶生，	Thus they may indicate a mutual influence (in any two of them) of love or hatred, and good or evil is the result; or that mutual influence may be affected by the nearness of the lines to, 
遠近相取而悔吝生，	or their distance from, each other, and then repentance or regret is the result; 
情偽相感而利害生。	or the influence may be that of truth or of hypocrisy, and then the result is what is advantageous, or what is injurious.
凡易之情，近而不相得則凶，或害之，悔且吝。	In all these relations of the (lines in the) Yi, if two are near and do not blend harmoniously, there may be (all these results), - evil, or what is injurious, or occasion for repentance and regret.
將叛者其辭慚，	The language of him who is meditating a revolt (from the right) betrays his inward shame; 
中心疑者其辭枝，	that of him whose inward heart doubts about it diverges to other topics.
吉人之辭寡，	The words of a good man are few; 
躁人之辭多，	those of a coarse man are many.
誣善之人其辭游，	The words of one who slanders what is good are unsubstantial; 
失其守者其辭屈。	those of him who is losing what he ought to keep are crooked.